The Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction today presented by the
Permian Basin Science Fiction Association.
This is David Cruz and David Carson.
On this program we will be talking with author Larry Niven. Niven first appeared in
print in 1964 and by 1976 he had won the Hugo Award five times. He has written a set of stories
set in what he calls known space which are a future history or a series of stories with a
common background. He has also written several novels and stories not related to the known
space series. Aside from science fiction, Niven has written a fantasy called The Magic Goes
Away and co-authored with Jerry Pranell, a science fiction rendering of Dante's Inferno
entitled appropriately enough Inferno. Other collaborations with Jerry Pranell include
A Moat in God's Eye and the bestseller Lucifer's Hammer.
For my first question to you Mr. Niven I'd like to ask if you classify yourself as a
hard science fiction writer in the tradition of Hal Clement?
If you've got the class of Jaime that's where I fit yes. I would uh, I suppose all writers
resist classification as best they can. I do other things too. Fantasy, considerable
fantasy, a great deal more hard science fiction, not much in the way of soft science fiction.
Uh, articles, speeches. I'm the guy who did a study of the medical problems of breeding
Kryptonians called Man of Steel, Woman of Kleenex and I just published the only venture I've
ever made into economics. A method which would also solve the problem of nuclear waste disposal.
The idea is to turn the nuclear waste into coins. A healthy economy is one in which the
money circulates fast. You mentioned that you had not written much in the area of soft
science fiction. Do you think the new wave is past that fans and writers are turning
back to strongly science oriented stories? Yes I do. However the new wave was very good
to me. When I was first getting started I was the only new hard science fiction writer.
The new wave is a very persuasive thing and very easy to use to justify bad stories. I
think that's what killed it. Not that increased characterization and experiments with typography
and story formats are a bad thing in themselves but it's so easy to use new wave to justify
a bad story. It was bound to go out. How did you begin writing science fiction? Were you
always a science fiction reader? A fan? Yes and personally I found I was making up daydreaming
stories that seemed worth writing. Did you tell the stories to others before you gained
enough confidence to write them down? Yes I've been a storyteller all my life. You have
a large and involved fan following. Do you ever write specifically for them or do you
write only what you want to? I mostly write for myself or an imaginary reader who resembles
me a great deal. Only he needs things explained to him. Beyond that I sell it where I can
and pick up readers where I can. Let's turn to your known space series for a moment. How
did you get started writing a future history? Well there had been future histories around.
Poole Anderson's and Robert Heinlein's and I tell you I guess we each evolved the idea
somewhat independently and the idea is that if you carved out a consistent workable future
it seems a shame to waste it on one story. You put it in the background because you want
the background of a story to seem bigger than it is so there are things that are simply
unexplained. And if you think of more to say on a given subject why you go with it and
if you think of a story that fits into the background of a previous story and allows
you to elaborate on that background, sometimes you fall in love with the background and presently
you've got a bunch of stories that link. In the afterword of Ringworld engineers you said
that your known space series was completed. Is that still true and if so why? I've given
up saying that the known space series is dating. There's just no point in it. I've written
five books for you of known space stories since I said that. And besides that I have
no doubt that I'll come up with stories said in the Gildy Arms Time. I like writing science
fiction detective stories. It's just hard work. I do not have a detective story in my
head. It'll have to emerge. But that's the beginning of known space and I'll continue
to work with it where it looks like fun. You have as you mentioned written science fiction
detective stories and you've experimented with humor and science fiction. Is there any
subject area that you think can't be handled well in the science fiction genre?
No, I can't think of any. I guess I go along with the idea that there are these interlocked
circles to represent areas, areas of fiction and they all swim in the sea of fantasy. Science
fiction probably includes the entire portion of fantasy that is possible and mainstream
would be somewhere in there. Nurse novels would be somewhere in that. There would be
no subject you could treat in English that couldn't be treated in a science fiction format
except fantasy and that would be treated in a fantasy format.
Probably your best known work in the known space series is Ringworld. Can you tell us
how that concept came about? Oh, I ran across the concept Dyson's spear. Dyson, the mathematician
came up with the concept Dyson's shell and he was misunderstood to some extent. So, presently
I ran across an article about Dyson's spear. I picture that as a golf ball 93 million miles
in radius with a sun at the center and gravity generators all around the outside so he would
live on the inside, terraform it with oceans and soil and air.
I ran across that and I didn't like it. I thought it could be improved and I wound up with the
Ringworld. Freeman Dyson in commenting on your adaptation of his idea said that a great
number of small Ringworlds would be better than the large one that you had.
Believe I gave an acceptable answer to that in the Ringworld engineers but in general
he'd be right. It's just that the Ringworld engineers in particular are people who like
dependable weapons of huge size. Many of your fans pointed out a number of mistakes and
made many elaborations on the concept of the Ringworld. Can you tell us what some of them
were and how they were corrected or worked into the sequel? For instance, I suspected
the Ringworld was unstable and I suspected you'd eat attitude jets. I was sure that the
Ringworld was spinning fast enough to permit Leatheramjet to be used as attitude jets which
means you don't have a fuel problem at all. You're burning the solar wind. But rapidly
some MIT people demonstrated that the Ringworld was unstable and they were chanting it in
the halls at the next Worldcon. The Ringworld is unstable. The Ringworld is unstable.
It still took about seven years for anyone to figure out the exact numbers for the instability
and they are horrifying. The Ringworld, a major solar flare would have the Ringworld
grinding against its sun in five years. Well I worked it into a plot. That was one elaboration
or error. Another just can't be correct. It seems that there's too much twilight with
the shadow squares set up the way I have them set up. You get too much of neither day nor
night but twilight half the sun showing, part of the sun showing. The shadow squares ought
to be set up with about five big shadow squares moving in a retrograde world. That way you
get day and night setting much faster when it sets. Terminator line moves like a bat
out of hell. It's still a little fuzzy which doesn't matter. Third point, somebody pointed
out that the tensile strength necessary to hold the Ringworld together is on the order
of the tensile strength of an atomic nucleus. It's the super strong force. Okay, I can live
with that. I can postulate that. I knew this grip would have to be stronger than any normal
material already. Fourth point, some high school class in Florida got to work on the
Ringworld and their conclusion was that the Ringworld's worst problem is that all the
topsoil would wind up in the oceans in about three thousand years. There are no earthquakes
on the Ringworld. No mountain building forces. Okay, that's a tough one. I set up a spillpipe
system that runs the top, that runs the sea bottom from the sea bottoms under the Ringworld
and up over the edge of the Ring, rim wall. That even allows you some mines accumulation
of useful metals. What else? Checking my head. I find Frank Gisperic's suggestion that a
machine building culture on the Ringworld which reached our level wouldn't have any petroleum
products to use. They would wind up using alcohol, of where we use gasoline. And fine,
I can live with that. As a matter of fact, the sludge from making alcohol for automobiles,
the sludge can be used to make plastics, maybe plastic like substances, maybe the chemicals
are just as elaborate as the residues from petroleum. What else? Still checking in my
head. I pick up on other things I can't use such as Dan Alderson's solar system which
involves four Ringworlds. He's got three Ringworlds about the size of mine rotating
orthogonally on frictionless bearings. And the fourth Ringworld is about the size of
the orbit of Jupiter and inhabited by mesplanites. Mesplanites derived from a novel by Hal Clemant
mission of gravity. And mesplanites require cold temperatures about those of the orbit
of Jupiter as opposed to Jupiter which has an internal heat source. Cold temperatures
and heavy gravity. So his fourth Ringworld is the size of the orbit of Jupiter and spinning
like a bat out of hell. I had it figured out that if they spun that Ringworld any faster,
it would get nearer the speed of light and contract. Dan says I've misunderstood relativity,
it would not contract. Okay, I still haven't figured out why not. Well you obviously enjoy
playing the game as how Clemant calls it between your own scientific knowledge and that of
your readers and peers. Absolutely. I incorporated everything that sounded good that I could
use in elaborating the design of the Ringworld. What do you think about the current ideas
for space habitats that are proposed by Gerardo Neal and others? I think they are grandiose
and I certainly wouldn't stop him. But the space program seems to have fallen flat on
its face at this point. We will have trouble reaching the moon again. Getting back to the
moon is as big a problem as we can face. I resent having to say that, but I believe
it's true. Let's turn for a moment to another of your novels, one written with Jerry Pernell,
The Mode in God's Eye. How do you go about constructing an alien like the Moaties? Were
you influenced by anyone in that area? The Moaties were, no, not in that case. In that
case, I had the idea that I was following a progression with a protozoan, with an amoeba.
You get radio symmetry inside and out. Move up a goodly distance and you find starfishes
with radio symmetry on the outside and bilateral symmetry on the inside. Move up a little further
and you find flat worms and worms of all stance. At the level of bilateral symmetry,
inside and out, go as far as a human and you find bilateral symmetry on the outside and
no symmetry, well, half symmetrical on the inside. The lungs look symmetrical, the kidneys
look symmetrical, the intestines look like somebody dropped a plate of spaghetti. I tried
to move on to the next step, bilaterally unsymmetrical on the outside. I got a little bit of a little
bit of the original Modi, which was the engineer for them. But I always design aliens for themselves.
I almost never design an alien to match a story. The story, some story, will eventually
include the alien. The alien stands for itself. I think that one of the outstanding aspects
of the Moaties was their non-use of standardized machines. They would create whatever replacement
parts that they needed on the spot. Do you recall what caused you to think along those
lines for your alien society? I was just playing along. I was just playing with the ideas at
that point and that one seemed like a fun one. It also seemed likely enough if you've got
a critter with not much intelligence except in the direction of tool making and tool altering.
Then why not? The thing has to keep testing its ability or it will lose it. It might as
well be designing something every time it needs a specific machine. The master can always
stop it and have it producing as if by assembly lines. If a master needs a lot of something
it's fast. In Ringworld you developed something called the Teela Brown Gene, humans bred to
be lucky. Was that just a story gimmick or were you extrapolating on the evolution of
humanity? Oh, partly that and partly you've got to remember the time I was writing. I
was damn sick and tired of psychic powers showing up in stories. I did not believe in
psychic powers at that time. I've been told they look pretty good now but at the time
I can see the Teela Brown Gene as being the ultimate psychic power which you may interpret
either as luck or as author control. In that sense it was something of a put on except
that I can believe almost anything while I'm writing the story and I am able to extrapolate.
So if Teela Brown is lucky certain things emerge and if she's just a statistical food
then something else emerges and that's that people will interpret anything that happens
to her as luck, defending her preconception. What do you consider to be your best work
or your favorite work? No, I couldn't tell you that. There is no way I can name a favorite
work. The whole, my career is a progression for one thing. I'd take any novel or any
important short story even out of that progression and it wanders away in a different direction.
So I don't think I have a favorite story but I suppose I can name Incontin Moe which
is virtually the only strictly love story I've ever done. I suppose I can name Lucifer's
Hammer which made me the most money. So a Moe in God's eye may be that. I suppose I can
name old man of steel woman of Kleenex which has gotten me the most laughs I suppose. Everybody
seems to have read it. Moes who haven't heard of out of the cocktail party. Or what? I,
Jerry Pornell and I just recently wrote the last ten minutes for a movie that had a good
90 minutes followed by a bad last ten minutes. The last I've heard is they're not going to
make the movie which is a dirty shame. That is they're not going to make the last ten
minutes our way. They're going to fiddle with what they've got. That's a really dirty
shame. What they've got is garbage. I really hope they use that last ten minutes and if
they do I will get considerable enjoyment out of that and that'll be my favorite. You name
it. You mentioned your collaboration with Jerry Pornell. Which do you prefer, writing
a loan or with another author? I prefer variety. I even prefer variety in my collaborators.
I just finished a novel with a Stephen Barnes and we're starting another. A short one. And
Jerry and I are starting another. A novel about, well we've designed a novel about
a friend, an alien that could invade the earth and also would want to, it's tough to get
an alien whom you could believe would want to invade the earth from another star considering
the distances involved and the energy involved and the penalties for failure and the lack
of the unlikelihood that it will do your home planet any good if you conquer something
that is six light years away. Anyway, we've designed one and we will be writing a novel
about that. When writing in collaboration is it difficult to decide who writes what?
It's hard sometimes but it always resolves. The question is who is most qualified to write
a given scene that we have both decided needs writing. Before we start we have the novel
all laid out. We know what's going in virtually everywhere and if we don't it feels like we
do. And if we find out we don't we elaborate as we get to that section. Okay, the next
question is who is qualified to write a given scene? Sometimes it's obvious. If we're dealing
with a mad man he's mine. If we're dealing with military operations it's Jerry's. Aliens
are generally mine. Politics is generally Jerry's. Knowledge of history generally Jerry's
and a real evil son of a bitch Jerry usually creates him and I usually run with him afterwards
because Jerry has a lot of textbooks on psychology and PhD in psychology for that matter sorry
doctorate psychology and when he's created a really evil son of a bitch he just hates
him too much to work with him. I can easily do something. Horace Berry went that way and
the rapist in Lucifer's hammer and a couple of the characters in Inferno. I understand
that both you and Mr. Pranell use computer word processors. How does that aid in your
writing? It makes first draft a little faster but it makes corrections enormously faster.
You get a more polished novel when I'm using a word processor. It's polishing is just
like thinking into the machine almost. The word processor feels like a magic typewriter.
It does everything you would want a typewriter to do only it can. It can't erase whole blocks
of printed at time and then straighten up the page so it looks like you never made any
corrections but a word processor can do just that and move blocks up and down the page
up and down the manuscript. What do you think Mr. Neumann is the future of science fiction?
Has fantasy begun taking over or is there a lot more hard science fiction to come? Hard
to say. For one thing writers in general don't take orders where the damn science fiction
field is galloping off in all directions just as it always has and the reader will make
the final decision in most cases. What will be successful it will depend on who buys what
books. That's always been true. I understand that some of your works were involved several
years ago with the animated Star Trek series. How did that come about? Oh it went like this.
They were going to start a Star Trek cartoon and the lady who was story editor got me involved.
I tried to give them a story that involved a mini black hole and an outsider ship. I
had the idea that Star Trek had been using many rubber suits for so long that they wouldn't
realize how much more freedom they had with the animated version. That turns out not to
be the case. They had some very good ideas in there. But that story turned out to be a
little over the heads of their intended audience. So I want, it did incidentally wind up as
the first version of the last part of a story called the Border of the Soul. So I eventually
wound up meeting Gene Roddenberry and he wound up suggesting why don't I take a story called
Soft Weapon and turn it into a Star Trek version. And I did that and called it the Slaver Weapon.
And fine they eventually made a cartoon out of it. They also sold the right to turn that
cartoon script into a story. They sold that to Ballantyne. I got mildly upset. The president
of the Civil who was Jerry Brunel at the time got seriously upset and started making as
many waves as he could. And what eventually happened was that they sent me a dollar, a
check for two dollars and something, something cents. Somewhere between two and three dollars.
And Jerry, I don't know where the negotiations went, but Jerry wound up saying, okay that
defends the principle of the thing. We'll ask for more next time. And that's that for
some years. By then I had written to Ballantyne and gotten a letter from Betty Ballantyne
saying, hey we won't ever use it. We promise, we see you're upset. We promise we won't ever
do anything with this. A little later the Ballantyne's got out of the Ballantyne Books
business and into the business of printing illustrated stuff. And Judy Lindell Ray wound
up in charge. And presently I'm being offered two thousand bucks as advisor to Alan Dean
Foster who will turn my script into a novel. And I said fine when I, what I read was that
was acceptable. Two months later I've got a letter from Judy Lind dropping the price
to five hundred and I pulled my top. I said, A, I won't collaborate with you or Alan on
anything of the kind. And B, you may not use anything from known space except what's in
the script. And that is the way it happens. Are there any plans for motion picture or
television adaptations of any of your works in the near future?
Yes there are. I just don't know how far they are going to go. But there is a group that
owns an option on death by ecstasy. And a guy who owns an option on the modian God's
eye. And let's see, I've got a friend trying to get a public broadcasting system to make
a TV version of Lucifer of In Constant Moon. Which would be nice. All of which would be
nice.
Are there any contemporary writers that you particularly enjoy reading?
Yes, a great many. Ursula Le Guin, John Varley, Paul Anderson, Jerry Pornell. How far do we
go with this? I like the old ones and I like the new ones. I like about half of Paul Anderson's
stories, which is a better record than many writers have. I like a few of Bill Dixon's
stories and I will probably buy the last of the Dorsi books by Gordy Dixon. In fact,
it's damn certain I will read it. I'll buy it if it doesn't come free. I swamped in free
books. I'm a Pyrrhus Anthony fan. I don't know how numerous we Pyrrhus Anthony fans
are. I like the puzzles in his books. His books are always jammed with puzzles and new ways
of thinking and so forth.
One last question. I don't suppose those Pearson puppeteers ever snuck you the formula for
the general products, did they?
No, I don't have the formula for the general products though, but I have reason to suspect
that there are puppeteers on Earth. Look at the characteristics. Forget the shape. They
must be masters of biology to hide that peculiar three-legged two-headed shape. But consider
their characteristics. They are cowards. That is, they want everything utterly safe. No corners
on anything. Everything is soft surfaces around the puppeteer world. They don't even keep their
world near a sun regarding it as a runaway fusion reactor, which of course it is. So,
desperate regard for safety, they plus an urge to meddle in the lifestyles of other species,
driving urge to meddle with practically no restraints attached. What does that remind
you of? It seems nearly certain to me that Ralph Nader is a Pearson's puppeteer.
This is David Cruz.
They are laying.
And David Carson.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a presentation of the Permian Basin Science
Fiction Association in conjunction with KOCV FM and Odessa College, Odessa, Texas.